The Internet of Things (IoT) is a network of physical objects that are interconnected through sensors and software to exchange data with other devices and systems via the Internet. The Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) technologies is one of the IoT branches, where IoMT devices transmit a vast amount of medical data in real time. Healthcare data is highly susceptible to cyber attackers. In this project, we have designed a hybrid framework combining cryptographic and steganographic methods.
Cryptography is the technique of transforming plain text or image to ciphertext or cipher image using mathematical techniques. We have implemented Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) 256 as cryptographic technique. It is a secure symmetric encryption algorithm using a single 256-bit key to encrypt and decrypt data. Steganography is the process of concealing information in another medium (audio, video, image, etc.). It hides the transmitted data inside a cover object (carrier object). Through the process, a stego-object is created, which carries the hidden information object but appears identical to the cover object. The encoder that we have implemented is a combination of AES-256 cryptographic and the Least Significant Bit (LSB) steganographic technique. On the encoder side, sensitive medical data is first encrypted with a symmetric key (k) utilizing the AES-256 algorithm. This encrypted data is transformed into a bitstream. The bitstream is embedded into a cover image using the LSB method, resulting in a stego image. The stego image is then transmitted over the Internet. On the decoder side, the steps are performed in the reverse sequence. The LSB-embedded data is extracted first. Then the extracted data is decrypted using the symmetric key (k) of AES-256. For performance evaluation of the use case, we have analyzed the histograms of the original image and the stego image. Identical histograms prove that both images are alike and undetectable to hackers.
The objective of the project is to ensure communication security in IoMT devices through a hybrid cryptographic and steganographic technique in medical data transmission. Securing healthcare data will increase the effectiveness of IoMT devices benefiting the patients and developing a smart healthcare system.
